[ADR: 014] Proportional Slashing (#5211)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adt-014-proportional-slashing.md

# ADR 14: Proportional Slashing

## Changelog

- 2019-10-15: Initial draft

## Context

In Proof of Stake-based chains, centralization of consensus power amongst a small set of validators causes harm to the network due to increased risk of censorship, liveness failure, fork attacks, etc.  However, while this centralization causes a negative externality to the network, it is not directly felt by the stakers contributing towards delegating towards already large validators.  We would like a way to pass on the negative externality cost of centralization onto those large validators and their stakers.

## Decision

### Design

To solve this problem, we will implement a procedure called Proportional Slashing.  The desire is that the larger a validator is, the more they should be slashed.  The first naive attempt is to make a validator's slash percent proportional to their share of consensus voting power.

```
slash_amount = k * power // where k is a constant and power is the faulting validator's voting power.
```

> However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who slash in a short time window.

Reviewer: `who slash in a short time window`

Who _get_ slashed in a short time frame?

> However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who slash in a short time window.

Reviewer: So slash by an on-chain param * total voting power? You fail to explain why this is the logical solution (although it may be obvious to some).

Author: The on-chain parameter is mostly to weight different types of slashes.  So we may want liveness slashes to only be 10% as severe as a double sign slash.

> However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who slash in a short time window.

Author: Yes, or on correlated infrastructure (i.e. same cloud provider).  For example, if we don't add the faults of other validators, they should even just run a single node with two instances of KMS signing for two different validators, and still reduce the slash if they fault at the same time.

Like let's say instead of one operator account of 10%, we do two operator accounts of 5% running on the same node.  If that node crashes, both my accounts only get slashed at 5%.  At the very least we have to add them together.

Later, I explain why the slash should actually be >10%, not just 10%.

```
slash_amount = k * (power_1 + power_2 + ... + power_n) // where power_i is the voting power of the ith validator faulting in the period
```

> Now, if someone splits a validator of 10% into two validators of 5% each which both fault, then they both fault in the same window, they both will still get slashed at the sum 10% amount.

Reviewer: It's not clear to me if a validator that splits up its power amongst numerous accounts should deserve to have its slash fraction potentially include faults of other validators who are not involved in the fault at hand.

Reviewer: Also, is this different from the naive solution? If a validator that deserves to be slashed 10% splits up their power into two accounts, they'll still be slashed 10% cumulatively if both accounts commit the same infractions, no?

Author: It is the responsibility of validators to decorrelate themselves from other validators.  The more validators that fault at once, even accidentally, causes harm to the network because it decreases the resources that an attacker needs to acquire to attack the network.  Thus it is logical to punish correlated faults, even if accidental.

Author: Also, no it's different than the naive solution because in the naive solution, both validators of 5% power will each only get slashed at 5%.  Thus, the total 10% amongst two validators is still only getting slashed at 5%.

We want the total 10% to get slashed at a rate >= 10%.

Reviewer: Ok, I see how this is better than the naive solution. However, `It is the responsibility of validators to decorrelate themselves from other validators.` doesn't much make sense to me but I get the gist of what this is trying to accomplish.

One will note, that this model doesn't differentiate between multiple validators run by the same operators vs validators run by different operators.  This can be seen as an additional benefit in fact.  It incentivizes validators to differentiate their setups from other validators, to avoid having correlated faults with them or else they risk a higher slash.  So for example, operators should avoid using the same popular cloud hosting platforms or using the same Staking as a Service providers.  This will lead to a more resilient and decentralized network.

### Implementation

In the slashing module, we will add two queues that will track all of the recent slash events.  For double sign faults, we will define "recent slashes" as ones that have occured within the last `unbonding period`.  For liveness faults, we will define "recent slashes" as ones that have occured withing the last `jail period`.

```
type SlashEvent struct {
    Address                 sdk.ValAddress
    ValidatorVotingPercent  sdk.Dec
    SlashedSoFar            sdk.Dec
}
```

These slash events will be pruned from the queue once they are older than their respective "recent slash period".

> Whenever a new slash occurs, a `SlashEvent` struct is created with the faulting validator's voting percent and a `SlashedSoFar` of 0.  Because recent slash events are pruned before the unbonding period and unjail period expires, it should not be possible for the same validator to have multiple SlashEvents in the same Queue at the same time.

Reviewer 2: Is it possible for a validator to be in both queues? Does that introduce any issues?

Author: Yes, a validator can be in both queues.  I don't think it should cause issues, because the `SquareOfSumOfRoots` calculation is independent for different types of faults.  I don't count for correlation of double signs with liveness.

> We then will iterate over all the SlashEvents in the queue, using their `ValidatorVotingPercent` to calculate the new percent to slash all the validators in the queue at, using the "Square of Sum of Roots" formula introduced above.

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to iterate every single time that a new `SlashEvent` comes in to calculate `NewSlashPercent`?

Author: Yeah.  But oh, but that gives me an idea.  I can probably store the sqrt(power) in the slash event, so we don't need to recalculate that each time.  That's the expensive part.

> Once we have the `NewSlashPercent`, we then iterate over all the `SlashEvent`s in the queue once again, and if `NewSlashPercent > SlashedSoFar` for that SlashEvent, we call the `staking.Slash(slashEvent.Address, NewSlashPercent - SlashedSoFar)`.  We then set `SlashEvent.SlashedSoFar` amount to `NewSlashPercent`.

Reviewer 2: From my understanding this requires 2 iterations over the `SlashQueue` every time a new slash occurs. Is that correct?

Also since these validators are getting slashed incrementally, I'm not sure this solution is correct:

Let's say we want to slash a Validator A by 75% cumulatively and it initially has 100 ATOM.

Say in Round 1, the `NewSlashPercent` is 50%:
ValidatorA now has 50ATOM

Say in Round 2, the `NewSlashPercent` is 75%"
So Validator will now get slashed `75-50 = 25%`:
ValidatorA now has 37.5 ATOM

If the Slash of 75% happened at once: The Validator will have 25ATOM

So there is a difference here which causes incorrect behavior from my understanding. Let me know if my thinking is wrong here

Author: In the stakingkeeper Slash function, you pass in what power that the slash percent is based on.  And so we pass in the original power, which we stored in the `SlashEvent` struct.

So in your example, when we call slash in Round 2, we say slash 25% of the original power of 100 Atoms.

See implementation here:  https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/sunny/proportional-slashing/x/slashing/internal/keeper/infractions.go#L249

Author: I'll add this note to the ADR spec.

# ADR 14: Proportional Slashing

## Changelog

- 2019-10-15: Initial draft

## Context

In Proof of Stake-based chains, centralization of consensus power amongst a small set of validators causes harm to the network due to increased risk of censorship, liveness failure, fork attacks, etc.  However, while this centralization causes a negative externality to the network, it is not directly felt by the stakers contributing towards delegating towards already large validators.  We would like a way to pass on the negative externality cost of centralization onto those large validators and their stakers.

## Decision

### Design

To solve this problem, we will implement a procedure called Proportional Slashing.  The desire is that the larger a validator is, the more they should be slashed.  The first naive attempt is to make a validator's slash percent proportional to their share of consensus voting power.

```

> slash_amount = power // power is the faulting validator's voting power.

Reviewer: Typically, this is `k * power`, where `k` is some on-chain constant.

Author: I moved the mention of the constant multiplier further down for simplicity.

```

> However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who get slashed in a short time window.

Reviewer: I think it's important to note here that "splitting" up accounts into Sybil validators isn't trivial unless the validator has a substantially large self-bond.

Author: Well, as a validator operator, I could just create two validators (i.e. `Sikka 1` and `Sikka 2`) and encourage my delegators to delegate to both.

Author: This is especially true for validators who delegation is primarily self-bonds.

> However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who get slashed in a short time window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this will incentivize validators with large amounts of stake to split up their voting power amongst accounts, so that if they fault, they all get slashed at a lower percent.  The solution to this is to take into account not just a validator's own voting percentage, but also the voting percentage of all the other validators who get slashed in a specified time frame.
```

```

> slash_amount = (power_1 + power_2 + ... + power_n) // where power_i is the voting power of the ith validator faulting in the period

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slash_amount = k * (power_1 + power_2 + ... + power_n) // where power_i is the voting power of the ith validator faulting in the specified time frame and k is some on-chain constant
```

```

> Now, if someone splits a validator of 10% into two validators of 5% each which both fault, then they both fault in the same window, they both will still get slashed at the sum 10% amount.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if someone splits a validator of 10% into two validators of 5% each which both fault, then they both fault in the same time frame, they both will still get slashed at the sum 10% amount.
```

We can achieve this by not only taking into account the sum of the percentages of the validators that faulted, but also the *number* of validators that faulted in the window.  One general form for an equation that fits this desired property looks like this:

```
slash_amount = (sqrt(power_1) + sqrt(power_2) + ... + sqrt(power_n))^2
```

So now, for example, if one validator of 10% faults, it gets a 10% slash, while if two validators of 5% each fault together, they both get a 20% slash ((sqrt(0.05)+sqrt(0.05))^2).

> One will note, that this model doesn't differentiate between multiple validators run by the same operators vs validators run by different operators.  This can be seen as an additional benefit in fact.  It incentivizes validators to differentiate their setups from other validators, to avoid having correlated faults with them or else they risk a higher slash.  So for example, operators should avoid using the same popular cloud hosting platforms or using the same Staking as a Service providers.  This will lead to a more resilient and decentralized network.

Reviewer: ```
This can be seen as an additional benefit in fact.  It incentivizes validators to differentiate their setups from other validators, to avoid having correlated faults with them or else they risk a higher slash.
```

idk if this is fair to say exactly. There are only so many cloud providers and so many correlations you can make. It can still be the case that a lowly validator gets bucketed with a top 10 validator with a completely different setup.

Reviewer 3: Suppose, the validator having power 100. he got delegations from two accounts with `min-self-delegation` = 1atom (he got remaining 99atoms from delegators). In this case how the Proportional slashing will work?

Author: @baymax19 proportional slashing makes no distinction between self-bond vs external delegation.  A validator's total delegation is what is taken into account.

Author: @alexanderbez  We should encourage validators to not be overly reliant on cloud providers, especially on single cloud providers, as that can be a large source of centralization risk to the network.  Furthermore, even on cloud providers, you can do things like diversify with respect to regions, OSs, access control, etc.

Most importantly, however, it should hopefully decrease reliance on "Staking as Service Operators", entities that run white-label validation services for other validators.

We can allow some parameterization by multiplying the slash by an on-chain governable parameter.

```

> slash_amount = k * (sqrt(power_1) + sqrt(power_2) + ... + sqrt(power_n))^2  // where k is an on-chain parameter for this specific slash type

Reviewer 4: Griefing (intentionally being slashed to make another's slash worse) could be a concern here.

Author: Yeah, the idea of incorporating the inverse gini somehow was meant to mitigate griefing attacks using many trivial size validators (1 atom).  However, I'm not over concerned at the moment, because, from playing around with it on paper, it's hard to increase the slash by much.  Also, because our validator set is saturated anyways, with a pretty high minimum, its not a huge concern, you'd have to slash yourself quite a bit in order to grief.  The larger the grief, the griefer loses quadratically more, so I think it's okay.

Reviewer 4: I agree that in practice it is unlikely to be a concern but I think we should mention it, and include that analysis. For some exponents or values `k` it might be a concern.

Author: Updated ADR to make note of griefing possibilities.

```

> This can be used to weight different types of slashes.  For example, we may want to punish liveness faults 10% as severely as double signs.  The k factor can also be something other than a constant, there is some research on using things like inverse gini coefficients to mitigate some griefing attacks, but this an area for future research.

Reviewer 4: The exponent (`sqrt` / `^2`) should also be a parameter, and I am not sure if `2` is the optimal choice (why?)

Author: I don't really have a good justification for why sqrt and ^2 is correct from a theoretical side, it was just the first thing I tried.  But from an implementation side, I think it's the most efficient.  We have to find do this calculation in the state machine.  `sqrt` has a relatively fast algorithm to find it (Newton's method), I'm not sure if something as fast for a configurable root exists.

Reviewer 4: Newton's method works for any function with a continuous derivative.

Are you thinking of the [Babylonian method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methods_of_computing_square_roots#Babylonian_method)?

Author: @cwgoes Do you have an idea of how to justify the exponent?

For parameterization, do you think this needs to be an on-chain governable parameter or just an in-code one?

Reviewer 4: > @cwgoes Do you have an idea of how to justify the exponent? Not really sure, without any useful real data.

Yeah, I'm not sure either, but the value of the exponent affects the penalty for multiple correlated faults with power summing to some `x` vs a single fault for a validator with power `x`, maybe we should just mention that and mention that it could be changed.

> For parameterization, do you think this needs to be an on-chain governable parameter or just an in-code one?

For parameterisation, I think an on-chain governable parameter would be nice, since it's easy enough to change (no state should be dependent on it).

Author: Updated ADR to reflect that its an on-chain parameter.

There can also be minimum and maximums put in place in order to bound the size of the slash percent.

> ### Implementation

Reviewer 4: F1 already tracks slash events. Ideally we should combine these trackers.

Author: Isn't this a conflation of concerns?  Don't want to add an unnecessary dependency between `distr` and `slashing`.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, I suppose not, storing them twice isn't great though. Maybe there should be a third module just to track slash events, imported by both?

Author: @alexanderbez Is this what the evidence module will do?

Reviewer: Evidence module does not track slashing events nor did we plan on it doing so -- I'm not sure it makes much sense.

Why not have the slashing module track slash events? I'm sure we can think of a clean way to retrofit that into distribution (e.g. via a minimal interface).

Author: Sure, I think it makes sense to track in slashing and refactoring `distribution` to be dependent on `slashing`.  I think that's out of scope for this ADR though.  A separate issue can be opened to make `distribution` use the slash events tracker in `slashing`.
